JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:We're bringing back jobs.
We're bringing down your taxes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump moves to roll
back regulations aimed at preventing a financial
crisis and imposes new sanctions on Iran.
Then, we are on the ground in Mosul, as the
battle to control the key Iraqi city rages
on.
JANE FERGUSON: The front line is just up here.
That's where the River Tigris is, and ISIS
fighters are trying to push the Iraqi army
back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks tackle a tumultuous
first two weeks of the Trump administration.
All that and more on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The first two weeks of the
Trump presidency are now behind us, punctuated
by a push to begin to deregulate the financial
industry.
John Yang reports on this day's events.
JOHN YANG: At the first meeting of this new
economic advisory council, President Trump
used touted his plans for progress.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:We're bringing back jobs.
We're bringing down your taxes.
We're getting rid of your regulations.
And I think it's going to be some really very
exciting times ahead.
JOHN YANG: The group talked banking rules
and tax reform.
But some also raised concerns that Mr. Trump's
immigration order would hurt their foreign
employees and the economy.
Blackstone Group CEO Steve Schwarzman is the
council's chairman.
He described the discussion on FOX Business
Channel.
STEPHEN SCHWARZMAN, CEO, Blackstone Group:
General Kelly, who runs Homeland Security,
was there and brought people up to date onthe changes that had been made.
And there was obviously concern by different
people and explanations.
And that issue had to be covered and was covered.
JOHN YANG: Even before the first meeting,
Uber chief executive Travis Kalanick quit
the group over the issue.
He had been pressed by both workers and customers.
He wrote to employees: "We will continue to
advocate for just change on immigration, but
staying on the council was going to get in
the way of that."
The same kind of pressure is driving a nationalboycott of Trump products.
Retailer Nordstrom is dropping Ivanka Trump'sfashion line, citing poor sales.
Today brought the number of Mr. Trump's executive
actions to 20.
DONALD TRUMP: Today, we're signing core principles
for regulating the United States financial
system.
Doesn't get much bigger than that, right?
JOHN YANG: That executive order directed the
Treasury Department to look for ways to roll
back the Dodd-Frank Act's regulations.
The 2010 legislation was in response to the
financial crisis.
It was intended rein in big banks and protect
consumers.
The president also signed a memorandum aimed
at blocking a retirement savings regulation
called the fiduciary rule.
Set to take effect in April, it's aimed at
making brokers put clients' interests first
when recommending investments for retirement
planning.
Administration officials call it a solution
in search of a problem, and the financial
industry has strongly opposed it.
Republican Representative Ann Wagner of Missouri
championed efforts to stop the regulation.
REP.
ANN WAGNER (R), Missouri: Taking the boot
off the neck of the American people and this
economy moving forward.
People are crying out to cut the red tape.
They are finished with the Washington knows
best, top-down bureaucratic regulation that
is absolutely suffocating American families.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump capped the second week
of his presidency by heading to Florida for
a weekend at his Mar-a-Lago resort.
On his way back to the White House on Monday,
Mr. Trump will spend his first major event
addressing troops.
He will be at Central Command at MacDill AirForce Base on Tampa Bay -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, a lot going on at
the White House this week, right up until
today.
The president's senior adviser Kellyanne Conway
in a situation where she had to retract a
statement she made in an interview yesterday.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
She talked to Chris Matthews on MSNBC last
night.
She was defending the president's immigration
order and she said that the media never reported
the Bowling Green massacre.
Well, one of the reasons the media never reportedit is because it never happened.
Today, she acknowledged on Twitter that she
had confused it with the arrest of two Iraqi
-- Iraqis who had been radicalized in Bowling
Green, Kentucky.
She apologized, but she also complained aboutbeing criticized for her slip.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John, you mentioned Twitter.
The president has continued to be active on
Twitter, this morning tweeting again about
that phone conversation that he had, reportedly
heated conversation, with the prime minister
of Australia, and then another one about,
of all people, Arnold Schwarzenegger.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
I will take them in order.
The prime minister of Australia said that
the phone call was candid and frank, which,
of course, is diplomatic language often for
a shouting match.
But he did say that, contrary to reports,
that Mr. Trump didn't hang up on him.
So, Mr. Trump thanked him for straightening
that out and called the original reports fake
news.
And then on Arnold Schwarzenegger, there was
a little back and forth yesterday from the
Prayer Breakfast, when he talked about the
ratings.
Mr. Schwarzenegger replied that maybe they
wanted to switch jobs, that Mr. Trump was
better at ratings and that he was -- Americans
could sleep at night.
He said, yes, Arnold Schwarzenegger did a
really bad job as governor of California and
even worse on "The Apprentice," but at least
he tried hard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it sounds like that settles
that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Yang, after another busy
week at the White House, thank you.
And in the day's other news: January's job
creation was the best since last September.
The Labor Department reports that U.S. employers
added 227,000 new jobs.
The unemployment rate ticked up to 4.8 percent.
Now, that is more Americans looking for work.
President Trump welcomed the report and said
that it shows a -- quote -- "great spirit"
in the country.
The jobs report and the president's move to
scale back financial regulations fueled a
rally on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 186
points to close back above 20000.
The Nasdaq rose 30, and the S&P 500 added
16.
The Trump administration imposed new economic
sanctions today on 13 people and a dozen companies
in Iran.
It is a response to Iran's test this month
of a ballistic missile.
Early this morning, the president tweeted:--
quote -- "Iran is playing with fire."
And Press Secretary Sean Spicer said the president
isn't ruling out other responses, including
military action.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press Secretary:
These sanctions today I think are going to
be very, very strong and impactful.
And I hope that Iran realizes that, after
the provocative measures that they have taken,
that they understand that this president,
this administration is not going to sit back
and take it lightly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later in the day, when Mr.
Trump was asked about Iran, he said -- quote
-- "They're not behaving."
But Iran's foreign minister, Javad Zarif,
posted his own tweet, saying -- quote -- "Iran
unmoved by threats.
Will never initiate war."
We will get into the details of these sanctions,
and the implications, after the news summary.
In Paris, security fears surged again today
when a man with a machete attacked guards
outside the famed Louvre museum.
The attacker, said to be an Egyptian national,
shouted "God is great" in Arabic.
He slightly injured one soldier before beingshot and wounded himself.
Museum-goers had to run away or shelter in
place.
A senior Israeli official is welcoming a U.S.statement on settlements.
In it, the Trump White House says they don't
impede peace, but that constructing new ones
or expanding existing ones -- quote -- "may
not be helpful."
In response, Israel's deputy foreign minister
said today: "The conclusion is that more building
is not the problem."
A spokesman for Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas called for action to prevent settlement
expansion.
U.S. Defense Secretary James Mattis reassured
South Korea and Japan today that the U.S.
is still committed to defending them.
His first trip abroad followed candidate Trump's
complaints that the allies should do more
for their own defense.
In Seoul, Mattis met with his South Korean
counterpart, and he underscored American support
to deter North Korea.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of Defense: America's
commitments to defending our allies and to
upholding our extended deterrence guarantees
remain ironclad.
Any attack on the United States or on our
allies will be defeated and any use of nuclear
weapons would be met with a response that
would be effective and overwhelming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mattis later met with Japan's
prime minister in Tokyo.
The U.S. has more than 28,000 troops in SouthKorea and about 50,000 in Japan.
The U.N. human rights commissioner is accusing
security forces in Myanmar of mass killings
and gang rapes against Rohingya Muslims.
A report today charges that there's a campaign
to drive them out of the mostly Buddhist nation.
Myanmar has denied previous allegations of
abuses against its Muslim minority.
It says it is battling insurgents.
Back in this country, a Justice Department
lawyer told a federal court today that 100,000
entry visas have been revoked under PresidentTrump's immigration order.
The State Department said later that the numberis actually fewer than 60,000.
Meanwhile, federal judges in Boston, Seattle
and Virginia held hearings on legal challenges
to the order.
So far, at this hour, there's been a split
in rulings.
The Boston judge declined to extend the partial
block on the Trump order, while, in Virginia,
a judge allowed a lawsuit challenge to go
forward.
The stage is set now for a Senate showdown
on Betsy DeVos.
She is President Trump's nominee to be secretary
of education.
Senators voted early this morning to end debate,
with Democrats and Republicans senators jousting
over the nominee's qualifications.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority Leader: The
nominee for the secretary of education is
one of the worst nominees that has ever been
brought before this body for a Cabinet position.
On the grounds of competence, on the grounds
of ideology and on the grounds of conflicts
of interest, she scores very, very low.
SEN.
LAMAR ALEXANDER (R), Tennessee: There will
be no mandates for Common Core, no mandates
for teacher evaluation, no mandates for vouchers,
no mandates for anything else from the United
States Department of Education headed by Betsy
DeVos.
We will be swapping a national school board
for what she believes in, which is a local
school board.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The confirmation vote on DeVos
will come next week.
It could end in a tie, leaving Vice PresidentPence to cast the deciding vote.
Congressional Republicans are also moving
to rescind more Obama-era regulations.
The House voted today to abolish a rule on
cutting methane emissions from natural gas
drilling.
And the Senate gave final approval to dropping
a mandate that energy firms disclose what
they pay governments for drilling rights.
We are going to look at the drive to rollback rules later in the program.
Enrollments on the national Obamacare Website have fallen slightly.
The government reported today that 9.2 million
people signed up through the end of January.
That's about half-a-million fewer than at
this point last year.
There are no final numbers yet for the 11
states with their own health insurance markets.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": new sanctions
against Iran in response to a ballistic missile
test; from Wall Street to the environment,
rolling back Obama-era regulations; the next
phase of the battle for Mosul; and much more.
As we reported earlier, the Trump administration
applied new sanctions today to more than a
dozen people and companies tied to Iran'sballistic missile program.
Hari Sreenivasan has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The White House says the
sanctions are not related to the nuclear deal,
and structured in a way that maintains the
U.S.' commitments to that agreement.
At the same time, the national security adviser,
Michael Flynn, also released a statement today,
saying -- quote -- "The international community
has been too tolerant of Iran's bad behavior.
The ritual of convening a United Nations Security
Council in an emergency meeting and issuing
a strong statement is not enough.
The Trump administration will no longer tolerate
Iran's provocations that threaten our interests."
Joining me now for what the new sanctions
and statements mean going forward is Karim
Sadjadpour of the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace MD-BO .
Karim, let's start by putting this in context.
Who do these sanctions affect and what are
they going to be prohibited from doing?
KARIM SADJADPOUR, Carnegie Endowment For International
Peace: Hari, these sanctions are very targeted
against individuals and entities that are
affiliated or part of Iran's Revolutionary
Guards, who are involved in Iran's missile
program and Iran's support for regional militias.
And they're very targeted.
They're not broad sanctions which are intended
to really change Iranian behavior.
But I do think they're intended to do what
General Flynn, the national security adviser,
said, which is to put Iran "on notice" -- quote,
unquote.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How different are they from
steps that perhaps the Obama administration
would have taken had they seen this ballistic
missile test happen on their watch?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: You know, the Obama administration
was reluctant to sanction Iran and counter
its regional behavior because they were very
worried that that would provoke an escalation
which would jeopardize the nuclear deal, which
was the Obama administration's main foreign
policy legacy.
And the Trump administration doesn't have
those concerns.
President Trump has routinely denounced theIran nuclear deal as a disaster.
And I think, in contrast to the Obama administration,
the Trump administration's national security
brain trust, men like General Flynn, General
Mattis at the Pentagon, these were men who
served in Iraq, and they hold Iran responsible
for the death of hundreds of U.S. soldiers.
And so they felt, during the Obama years,
that they were restrained from being able
to retaliate against Iran.
And now they feel unrestrained and they'reconfronting Iran in the region.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, Iran already this afternoon
said that they are planning to take similar
steps against members inside the United States.
Does this escalate?
Does this go further?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: I do think, Hari, that we
are in the early stages of an escalation which
could eventually, over months, culminate in
a military conflict either between the United
States and Iran or Israel and Iran.
Now, Iran's comfort zone is to have kind of
managed, contained hostility between the United
States and Iran.
For four decades, that's been a central partof the revolutionary ideology.
But they have stopped short of actually going
into military conflict with the United States.
I think that the early weeks and months of
the Trump administration will be a time in
which both countries are kind of feeling the
other one out.
Iran, I expect, will want to show that these
sanctions and the taunts from Trump are not
going to modify their behavior, but, at the
same time, they will probably want to respond
in a way which isn't going to significantly
escalate.
They will want probably a gradual escalation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is the end goal for both
sides here to see who will back out of the
deal first, or who will, at least in the international
community, lose face?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: You know, that's absolutely
right, that neither side will want to gratuitously
tear up the nuclear deal and be blamed for
it.
I think that one of the things the Obama administration
did well is that they made the case to countries
like China, Russia, America's European allies
that America tried to engage Iran, Iran didn't
reciprocate, and the problem lied in Tehran,
not Washington.
I think the challenge the Trump administration
will have is that you have a president in
Washington who is gratuitously blusterous,
not only toward America's adversaries, but
also America's allies.
And, at the same time, you have in Tehran
a president, Hassan Rouhani, and a foreign
minister, Javad Zarif, who in much of the
world seems like moderates, reasonable figures.
And add on to the fact that the Middle East
is in the throes of tumult and carnage.
And for many countries around the world, including
China, Russia and Europe, they see Iran as
a force for stability in the region and an
ally against ISIS.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Karim Sadjadpour,
thanks so much.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Thank you, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we're going to dig into
some of the actions taken this week by the
White House and the Congress to roll backObama era rules and regulations.
I am joined by our own Lisa Desjardins and
William Brangham.
And we welcome both of you.
It's good to have you here at the table.
William, I'm going to start with you.
We heard John Yang reporting earlier the administration
did today go after financial regulations that
were part -- a feature of the Obama administration,including a peace of Dodd-Frank.
Tell us about that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes.
Today was what some people would say was the
beginning of an all-out rollback.
Some would argue it's a dismantling of consumer
protections and financial regulations.
With regards to Dodd-Frank, this order that
the president put out doesn't mention Dodd-Frank
by name, but it's all about Dodd-Frank, Dodd-Frank,
as you remember, the 2010 law that said we
need to fix some of the problems that got
us into trouble in 2008, how banks operate,
the risks story can take.
They created the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau.
Critics have hated Dodd-Frank and all of its
tentacles ever since it was created.
And now the president has asked the secretary
of the treasury to look at all the different
rules within there, find out which are too
costly, which are too burdensome and potentially
get rid of them.
Supporters of Dodd-Frank would say maybe the
law wasn't perfect, but something had to be
done to constrain Wall Street since the 2008
crisis, so we don't see a repeat, and that
this move goes in the opposite direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, the other thing they did
which I think is important is they went after
a provision that -- again, feature of the
Obama administration -- that affects those
individuals who are paid to give retirement
financial advice.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
This is what was known -- this was the rulesthe Department of Labor put out.
It's called the fiduciary standard.
And last year, the Department of Labor said
any financial adviser or broker has to follow
this standard, which means you have to put
your clients' interests ahead of your own,
and not sell them a package that might kick
back fees to you or might not be very good
for them as a client.
Again, the industry for a long time has said
this is burdensome, costly, it stops people
from getting good financial advice.
And today the memorandum that the Trump administration
put out said, Department of Labor, look at
these rules, figure out which ones we should
get rid of.
Again, the supporters of these rules argue
that roughly $17 billion every single year
is lost by people who are given unscrupulous
advice and encouraging a dismantling of these
rules is a terrible idea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's certainly something
we want to continue to pay attention to.
So, Lisa, meantime, Congress moving in its
own way to roll back some important actions
during the Obama administration.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of them had to do withcoal mining and waterways.
Tell us about that one.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, Congress now is using
a very seldom-used law that allows them to
go after rules that were passed in the last
months of the Obama administration.
And the first one is this one, the stream
protection rule.
And what that does is, it requires mining
companies to monitor streams for pollution
and then it tells them exactly what quality
those streams must meet, or else mining companies
must fix the problem.
Republicans have moved this week in Congress
to roll that back.
That legislation is going to President Trump's
desk.
And now critics of that rule say the problem
was twofold, too onerous on the companies
and that it was poorly written, that it affected
Great Plains the same way as it did the mining
companies in West Virginia that it was really
aimed at.
But supporters point out that, according to
those who wrote this rule, it would have improved
thousands of miles of streams.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, the other thing we know
Congress is working on, hot-button topic,
guns and the access that people who may have
disabilities, and whether they have access.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is another big deal,
something that the House passed yesterday.
They would roll back a rule that had to do
with a 2007 law that came out of the Virginia
Tech massacre.
It was aimed at trying to prevent the mentally
ill from obtaining guns.
So, what this rule does is, it takes those
who are on Social Security disability and
who have been found to be mentally impaired,
puts those names into the national background
check system, so they would be prevented from
buying guns.
Critics -- the Republican critics of that
law say it's a problem because it's an overreach.
It would include anyone who doesn't take care
of their own finances.
Democrats say it's about safety.
Listen to just this split on the House floor
yesterday.
REP.
JACKIE WALORSKI (R), Indiana: If you receive
Social Security disability payments and someone
helps you manage the payments, this regulation
stops you from being able to purchase a firearm.
Your name gets added to a federal database,
and the burden is on you to prove it doesn't
belong there.
This is absolutely outrageous.
REP.
JUDY CHU (R), California: This will not only
make it easier for even those with severe
mental health issues to buy a gun, but it
will also take the option for writing similar
rules off the table forever, tying the handsof all future administrations.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, that reversal of thatgun rule now goes to the Senate.
It's expected to pass.
And, Judy, the thing I want to impress on
people is that because of this special law
that they're using here, the House and Senate
can get these rollbacks through more quickly.
They only need a majority vote in the Senate,
not 60 votes.
We are going to see a lot of these in coming
weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, we're only two
weeks in.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Already, all this is happening.
Lisa Desjardins, William Brangham, we thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze week two of the Trump
administration; a stark film about race in
America told through James Baldwin's unfinished
novel; and a Muslim Marine who tells people
to ask him anything.
But first: the battle for Mosul.
The months-long siege by Iraqi forces, with
U.S. support, has taken back about half the
city.
Signs of life are returning to those areas,
while a new offensive is in the works to capture
the rest from ISIS control.
Special correspondent Jane Ferguson and videographer
Alessandro Pavone have our report.
JANE FERGUSON: Weaving through recaptured
streets of Eastern Mosul, Colonel Nazar Naji
takes us to the Iraqi army outposts under
his command.
His men are positioned on rooftops, watching
for any signs of ISIS fighters coming across
the Tigris River that flows through the city.
Recently, he tells me, around 50 fighters
managed to cross and attack this position.
COL.
NAZAR NAJI, Iraqi Army (through translator):
They have been trying to break into the eastern
side of the city, because they are now surrounded
on the West side.
They are besieged by the Iraqi army, militias
and police.
JANE FERGUSON: Since the campaign to drive
ISIS out of Mosul began nearly four months
ago, Iraqi forces, backed by U.S. air support
and special forces, have retaken the eastern
side of the city up to the river.
The western side is now completely surrounded,
and ISIS is under siege.
An Iraqi military offensive to retake the
rest of the city is expected to start at any
time.
Meanwhile, ISIS sharpshooters are still killing
soldiers on the government-controlled side.
Because of ISIS snipers just across the river,
we need to use these trucks as protection.
These neighborhoods were recaptured by Iraq's
U.S.- trained special forces after brutal
fighting.
It's now up to the regular Iraqi army to try
to hold the line.
Colonel Naji hears on the radio a position
nearby is coming under heavy fire, and he
races there to lead his soldiers.
Backup arrives with heavy weaponry.
COL.
NAZAR NAJI (through translator): There is
an attack by ISIS, and the Humvees are going
to support them.
There is only one injury, God willing.
JANE FERGUSON: For these men, the fear is
that this attack is only to distract them
while ISIS sneaks fighters across the river.
The front line is just up here.
That's where the River Tigris is, and ISIS
fighters are trying to push the Iraqi army
back.
Nearby, the unit responds with mortars.
The one casualty, a soldier hit in the head
with some shrapnel, is patched up and raced
away from the front line.
But just a short distance away, a remarkable
sight: Mosul's streets are again vibrant.
Life has returned to areas recaptured from
ISIS.
Even traffic jams are common.
Just weeks ago, these streets were deadly
battlegrounds.
Now shops and restaurants are open for business.
Open-air markets take place every day, packed
with people.
Under ISIS, food shortages were severe and
prices crippling.
Getting food is now easier, but life is still
tough.
WOMAN (through translator): There is no water
and no electricity.
We are pumping water out of old wells.
And it's not clean.
People can get very sick from it.
JANE FERGUSON: The men at this tea stall are
relieved that their neighborhood is safe now,
but they have other worries.
MAN (through translator): Education is also
so important.
For three years, our children have not gone
to school.
They are behind with their studies.
JANE FERGUSON: That's changing for many children
in Eastern Mosul; 250 teenage boys attend
this school.
These young men would have been targeted for
recruitment into the ranks of ISIS fighters.
These boys are so determined to be here, they
have come despite the lack of electricity
and freezing temperatures in the classroom.
They haven't been in school for years, and
the teachers are delighted to see them.
MAN: One hundred percent all the students
in this area love -- loving coming to school.
They excited to study.
JANE FERGUSON: Iraqis still living on the
ISIS side of the river don't have that chance.
Hundreds of thousands of people are still
trapped there.
Sometimes, the brave risk their lives, making
a run for it.
Back at the riverside, the army unit has spotted
two men trying to cross a bridge nearby.
They move into position to watch for them.
Captain Amr Abdul Sadda tracks them as they
approach.
An armored Humvee is moved in front of the
bridge.
In these tense moments, the soldiers have
to determine whether the men approaching them
are innocent civilians or suicide bombers.
This happens a lot, says the captain.
CAPT.
AMR ABDUL SADDA, Iraqi Army (through translator):
Every day, we try to secure families trying
to cross towards us, and give them covering
fire, because ISIS are using their snipers
on them.
JANE FERGUSON: They are scared?
CAPT.
AMR ABDUL SADDA (through translator): The
people on the other side are afraid.
But whenever they cross to us and we accept
them, we calm them down and tell them everything
is OK.
We are the security forces.
We are your brothers, and we are here to free
you.
JANE FERGUSON: Then they appear.
They have taken their clothes off to prove
they are not hiding weapons or explosives.
Relieved, and still frightened, they have
survived a perilous escape from ISIS territory.
But they are part of a tiny trickle of people
making it out.
The rest remain trapped on the other side
of this divided city.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane Ferguson
in Mosul, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That is syndicated columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome to both of you.
So much to talk about.
David, week two of the Trump administration.
Let's start with his pick for the Supreme
Court, federal Judge Neil Gorsuch.
What do you make of him?
DAVID BROOKS: Clearly qualified, first-rate
legal scholar, first-rate judge, first-rate
mind, apparently a first-rate person.
He's what any -- the best any Republican president
would have done.
So, I thought a very good pick for Donald
Trump.
The Democrats have a challenge.
They can either behave the way the Republicans
did to Merrick Garland, which would be disgraceful,
but that would blow up the system.
They have a loyalty either -- I think a primary
loyalty to the Constitution and basically
to the norms of how we have done justice constitutional
-- or justice confirmations for the past many
decades.
And that is, if the president picks someone
who is basically qualified, basically a good
person, then you confirm that person even
if you don't agree, because your side lost
the election.
Now, I understand the Democratic thinking.
The Republicans didn't behave this way.
But I guess my belief is that two terrible
behaviors don't make a good behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's your take on Judge Gorsuch?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, Judy, first of all, I
agree with David on the assessment of him.
He went to Georgetown Prep, which is a rather
exclusive local prep school, then on to Columbia
College, and then to Harvard Law School, then
to Oxford.
But the vice president made a point when he
was interviewed by you in this show, emphasizing
he's a fourth-generation Coloradan, because
his resume sounds very much like all the other
justices on the Supreme Court.
And as somebody who said that we ought to
have somebody on the court who went to night
school or went to public school -- but, nevertheless,
he does seem by temperament -- and I will
say this.
In an administration that has been marked
by total chaos and is unsettling in the way
it's behaved and the impulses it's shown by
its president, this was the exception.
It was incredibly normal.
They did it well.
The announcement was done well.
He's being -- the Sherpa he has on Capitol
Hill is former Republican Senator Kelly Ayotte
of New Hampshire, who is well-respected with
moderates and Democrats, and Ron Bonjean,
who was Trent Lott's adviser and spokesman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: So, that's been well done.
And he seems to be a quality product.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you agree with David, atough call here for Democrats?
MARK SHIELDS: It's tough in the sense that,
I mean, the Republicans were reprehensible,
what they did to Merrick Garland, reprehensible,
indefensible.
They never even gave the man a hearing, aman with a distinguished career.
They ignored the Constitution.
The temptation is enormous.
The pressure is enormous from the Democratic
base of the party.
And don't forget, I mean, the Republicans
responded to the Tea Party, which was the
base of their party.
And I can understand that.
But I think that -- you know, I think, unless
there's something hidden about him that nobody
seems to know and nobody seems to even be
suggesting, I think he's going to be awfully
tough to defeat.
And he's a quality nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're going to watch
that one unfold.
I do want to get, David, to the executive
orders.
They have been coming at us fast and furious
just about every day.
But the big one I want to ask you about is
the immigration order.
It's created a firestorm.
We just -- we announced -- we just reported
a few minutes ago a couple of federal judges
have ruled on it because of legal challenges.
There have been protests.
You have got State Department employees whohave signed a letter of dissent.
Is the administration getting off on the rightfoot or not with this statement?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, you know, I have been
inundated by 18 inches of orders, like we
all have over the last couple of weeks, and
some of them are good.
I think some of them are completely toothless
and symbolic.
But this one on the refuges is the one that's
truly abominable and reprehensible.
We can't remind people enough that it responds
to a problem that does not exist, that refugees
in from these countries have killed no one
in a terrorist attack.
That's not where the threat has lain.
It's from homegrown people.
It's maybe from other countries.
The 9/11 people were from Saudi Arabia and
some other places.
And so it's a response to nothing.
And so you have to think that it's just an
outgrowth of nativism.
And there has been a whiff of nativism, to
put it politely, in a lot of the measures
that this administration has done.
And it has offended our career people in the
State Department.
It has offended our allies.
It has offended a lot of people around theworld, for no good effect.
Usually, when there's some policy, there are
pros and cons.
There are literally no pros to this one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Any good effect?
MARK SHIELDS: No good effect.
And both the president and his vice president
made the mistake of referring to it as a ban,
then tried to -- Muslim ban -- then tried
to walk it back.
No.
And, Judy, the irony is, in a week where the
president says he wants to unleash churches
politically from being hobbled, and goes to
the National Prayer Breakfast, I mean, forgotten
is the message of Christ, that -- how youtreat the stranger among you.
Whatever you do for the least of these, that
of Moses, that you shall not oppress an alien,
because you yourselves have been aliens.
This has been the hallmark, this has been
the defining value of the United States.
We had six Nobel Prize winners American last
year.
All six were immigrants.
Immigrants have been the sustenance and the
survival and the treasure of this country.
And Donald Trump is appealing, as he did during
the campaign, to the basest, the most selfish
and the most literally un-American of instincts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, I wanted to ask you
about foreign policy, but I have to come back
to what you were just saying, an outgrowth
of nativism.
You wrote a very tough column this week, saying
this is not just a Republican administration;
it's an ethnic nationalist administration.
You talked about Republicans making a Faustian
bargain to go along with Donald Trump.
It's a pretty dark picture, isn't it, that
you have painted?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And I just think they're in an untenable position.
Listen, I grew up with Ronald Reagan.
And he's one of the reasons I think it was
very encouraging to be a conservative back
in those days.
And he had a refugee crisis when he first
came into office from Cambodia and Laos and
other parts of the world.
And he said, we're going to welcome them.
And he did welcome them.
And that was a Republican Party that did welcome
the refugee because it basically believed
in opportunity.
It believed in possibility.
It was a hopeful party.
This is not a hopeful party.
It doesn't believe in opportunity and -- it
does see possibility anywhere around the world.
It sees threat and menace.
And, frankly, it reminds me of some of the
reactionaries in Russia who think that the
purity of the country is in the dark soul
of the people who have been here for centuries,
and everything outside is a threat.
That's not been the American myth.
That's not the way we have defined our country.
And so I do think we're in the middle of a
big argument over how we define the American
idea.
And what Bannon and Trump have presented us
with is an idea of America that's not been
the traditional idea, not the Walt Whitman
idea, not the George Washington, Abraham Lincoln
idea, which is one of welcoming because we'rethe last, best hope of Earth.
And so we have hit the opposite of Emma Lazarus.
And that debate about the American idea, seems
to me, the core debate under this whole administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, the opposite of Emma
Lazarus.
MARK SHIELDS: The opposite -- yes.
Now, Americans -- Americans have gone through
nativist streaks before.
The Know-Nothings in the middle of the 19th
century were a dominant political influence
of many Northern states, held every seat in
the Massachusetts legislature, alarmed about
the influx of Irish immigrants and Catholics
coming into the country.
But I do think that one major difference between
our handling of civil rights in the 1960s,
when America rose to one of its most magnificent
eras and challenges, and immigration in the
21st century is the economy, I mean, that
the measure of our progress is not whether
we add more to the abundance of those who
have much, but whether, as Franklin Roosevelt
said, we provide enough for those who have
too little.
And during the '60s, the median income was
doubling of the American household.
And we have seen the stagnation.
We have seen what has happened.
And it comes at a cost.
And it comes at a cost in the psyche, that
Americans are less welcoming, we're more fearful.
And I really think that income inequality
is -- and the disparity in income and the
growing gap has contributed to that political
climate that Donald Trump has exploited so
brilliantly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and while we're watching
this immigration ban, or order, however you're
describing it, David, we have also watched
a flurry of statements and tweets about foreign
policy, and reported angry phone calls between
the president and the prime minister of Australia
and the president of Mexico.
Today, the White House issued sanctions, heightened
sanctions against Iran.
There seems to be a consensus that that's
a good idea.
But do you see an emerging -- what do you
see emerging in terms of foreign policy from
this White House?
DAVID BROOKS: I have to say it has been an
extremely unnerving week on the foreign policy
front.
The fight with the Australian ambassador -- or
with the Australian prime minister was emblematic.
Trump is right at some level.
That was a bad deal that the Obama administration
cut.
I understand why they cut it.
But, for the Trump administration, it was
a bad deal.
But that doesn't mean you get in a fight and
get in some temperamental hissy fit, as apparently
happened, with probably our most loyal ally
in the world, who's been with us at every
fight basically throughout our history.
And so that's a sign of characterological
problem.
And then you switch to the real problems in
the world.
We're not going to get in a war with Australia.
But, as Steve Bannon said, we might get ina war in the South China Sea.
And, as Mike Flynn said, we might get in a
war in Iran.
And we have to be tough with those countries,
but you would like to feel there is some control
in our toughness, that there's some strategy,
that we're not at the whim of one person's
pique.
And so, when we even take what seem to be
sensible actions in Iran -- or against Iran,
I have no confidence, and I don't think any
of us can have confidence, that there is something
steady and temperamental and in control about
that.
And, as I had mentioned on the program a few
weeks ago, the number of use of force decisions
the president has to take is large.
And none of us can be sure that the sane choices
will be made, let alone reasonable ones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, in just a minute, how
are you seeing this emerging national security
vision from this administration?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, Judy, I mean, we want
a president with a steady hand on the tiller.
I mean, that's what we want.
We want the captain who is -- who is stable,
who inspires confidence.
And that has not been the case.
This is the biggest betting week of the year.
This is the Super Bowl week.
And anybody would have given -- would have
won a fortune on the over-under that the country
you're going to pick an argument with is Australia.
It just -- it's incredible.
But it's all personal, because all politics
isn't local, as Tip O'Neill said.
All politics is personal with President Trump.
And that carries with it great, great problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are just at the beginning.
And we thank you both for your insights andwe hope you have a good weekend.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you.
Next: James Baldwin was one of the nation's
most prominent authors, public speakers, social
critics and civil rights activists.
A new Oscar-nominated documentary opening
today explores his life and legacy.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
It's part of our series Beyond the Red Carpet.
And a warning: It contains offensive language.
JAMES BALDWIN, Author/Civil Rights Activist:
There are days -- this is one of them -- when
you wonder what your role is in this countryand what your future is in it.
JEFFREY BROWN: His words never really went
away, but the writer James Baldwin, speaking
here on public television in 1963, feels as
relevant as ever.
JAMES BALDWIN: I'm terrified at the moral
apathy, the death of the heart, which is happening
in my country.
These people have deluded themselves for so
long, that they really don't think I'm human.
NARRATOR: "The story of the Negro in America
is the story of America.
It is not a pretty story."
JEFFREY BROWN: The clip is from a new documentary
that draws a portrait of the artist, though
not as a traditional film biography, and of
the fractured and racially divided world he
shone a searing light on.
NARRATOR: "I was free only in battle, but
never free to rest."
JEFFREY BROWN: It's called "I Am Not Your
Negro."
RAOUL PECK, Director, "I Am Not Your Negro":
James Baldwin is probably, for me and for
many other people, one of the most extraordinary
authors in this country, black or white.
And he is somebody who changed my life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Director Raoul Peck is best
known for documentaries and dramas about the
Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba, and "Sometimes
in April" about the Rwandan genocide.
Born in Haiti and raised in the Congo, Peck
says that, for him, James Baldwin was an early
and abiding influence about how to see and
encounter the world.
RAOUL PECK: It gave, suddenly, an explanation
to feelings that I had towards racism, toward
opportunities, toward politics and justice
and injustice, you know, a lot of things that,
as a young man, that you have, but because
there are not so many authors where you feel
you are represented, or the same on cinema.
There were not so many films where you saw
your own narrative on the screen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, that voice.
RAOUL PECK: That voice, and to feel you belong.
JEFFREY BROWN: Baldwin was born in Harlem
in 1924 and spent his youth there.
He later lived for years in France, where
he felt he could live more freely as a black
gay man.
He became known for essays, such as "Notes
of a Native Son" and "The Fire Next Time,"
novels including "Go Tell It on the Mountain"
and "Giovanni's Room," and much more, including
his role as a public commentator, debater
and witness.
JAMES BALDWIN: Again, like most white Americans
I have now encountered, they have no -- I'm
sure they nothing whatever against Negroes.
That's really not the question.
No, the question is really a kind of apathy
and ignorance, which is a price we pay for
segregation.
That's what segregation means, that you don't
know what's happening on the other side of
the world because you don't want to know.
NARRATOR: "I was in some way in those years,
without entirely realizing it, the great black
hope of the great white father."
JEFFREY BROWN: The film uses Baldwin's own
words and writings read by Samuel L. Jackson,
particularly a short manuscript he never completed
about three men he'd known, all of them assassinated
before the age of 40, Malcolm X, Medgar Evers,
and Martin Luther King.
As a film credit puts it, the film is, in
a sense, written by James Baldwin.
RAOUL PECK: So, my job is to find the book,
and to recreate it, and which is then the
film for me.
That was, of course, the line and the storyline
that I needed to construct that film.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's interesting.
So, to make the film that he set out to do,but wasn't able to finish.
RAOUL PECK: Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
So, that's why, as a filmmaker, I feel thatI was just the messenger.
I was just the person in charge to put it
together, but he already wrote it.
That's why I was very proud to be able to
put "directed by Raoul Peck, but written by
James Baldwin," because he wrote every single
word in the film.
I didn't add anything.
I deconstructed, but I didn't -- wrote it.
JAMES BALDWIN: What black people have to do
is try to find out in their own hearts why
it was necessary to have a nigger in the firstplace, because I'm not a nigger.
I'm a man.
But if you think I'm a nigger, it means you
need it.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his film, though, Peck has
done what Baldwin, who died in 1987, could
not: connect his time to ours through images
of Ferguson, Trayvon Martin, and more.
RAOUL PECK: When I started 10 years ago to
work on this project, it was because I already
felt that something was wrong.
It was for us, you know, scary, because it
was actually something we were working on.
And now we have visual of that, images.
And it made the film more urgent for us, but
it didn't really change the origin or the
needs for this movie and the need to go back
to Baldwin, because Baldwin gave us the fundamentals.
NARRATOR: "Well, I am tired.
I don't know how it will come about.
I know that, no matter how it comes about,
it will be bloody.
It will be hard.
I still believe that we can do with this country
something that has not been done before.
We are misled here because we think of numbers.
You don't need numbers.
You need passion.
And this is proven by the history of the world."
RAOUL PECK: He was already a classic, and
he wrote those things 40, 50 years ago.
And watching the film, you think that he would
have -- he wrote that in the morning, the
morning before watching the film, becausethose words are so accurate.
They are so prescient, you know?
And so it back-fold, that you can do it better.
JEFFREY BROWN: "I Am Not Your Negro" will
compete in the best documentary category at
the Academy Awards on February 26.
From Washington, I'm Jeffrey Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mansoor Shams served in the
United States Marine Corps from 2000 to 2004.
Recently, he has been traveling around the
country with a simple sign that reads: "I'm
a Muslim and a U.S. Marine.
Ask anything."
"NewsHour" producer Mike Fritz joined him
while he was on the streets of Baltimore to
listen in to some of the conversations he
was having.
MANSOOR SHAMS, Former U.S. Marine: Do you
know that I have to believe in Jesus Christ
in order to be a Muslim?
He's a very special person to us.
MAN: Oh, yes.
But he's more than a prophet.
MANSOOR SHAMS: But that's OK.
That's where we differ.
My name is Mansoor Shams.
I'm a former U.S. Marine.
I was born in Pakistan, came to the United
States at age 6.
I'm now 34 years old.
MAN: So, how are you Muslim and a Marine if
they hate you?
MANSOOR SHAMS: Because that's what I am.
MAN: It doesn't make sense.
MANSOOR SHAMS: How did I start this project?
Well, it's interesting, because never would
I have thought that we would reach a state
in our nation where we would be troubled or
confused or frustrated or divisive when it
came to people who followed my faith.
The more conversations that we have, the better.
Recently, I got to visit the cities of Houston,Denver, Portland, and Seattle.
It's always a new experience in general, because
you don't know how people are going to react,
and how they are going to take it.
MAN: ISIS, I thought they just chopped the
heads off.
They don't chop your head off.
They even have little children.
I couldn't even...
MANSOOR SHAMS: They're horrendous people.
I agree with you.
If ISIS caught me, they would put me -- break
me up into pieces.
Some of the questions that I get as I'm outand about relate to Sharia law.
That's a very big one.
So, they will say, do you believe in Sharia
law as a United States Marine, as a Muslim?
Of course, my answer is, yes, I do.
But it's not the way that you believe in it.
It's the way I believe in it.
I tell them that it's literally a path to
life-giving water.
It's a moral code.
It tells me not to commit adultery.
It tells me not to fornicate.
It tells me not to drink, not to gamble.
This is all forms of Sharia law.
A lot of people are scared of perhaps people
who follow my belief system or even look like...
MAN: I love Muslims.
I love everybody, brother.
I love you.
MANSOOR SHAMS: Hey, man.
Thanks, man.
You motivate me, man.
(LAUGHTER)
MANSOOR SHAMS: I think Americans do not understand
Islam.
It's been among -- amongst America for 200
years.
It's always been there.
MAN: And, see, that's what he's trying to
protect us from is the radical Muslim, the
ones that are intending to come over here
and kill us.
MANSOOR SHAMS: In the larger scheme of things,
when you paint an entire religion or an entire
nation, for that matter, with a broad brush,
and anyone who is an immigrant who's come
to this country, ask them how hard it is to
come to this country.
OK?
My feelings of Donald Trump, or President
Trump, has been mixed.
It's helped me to see another America thatI thought we had gone far past.
However, I did take the time to write him
a letter and to say that he could use me as
a potential resource.
I don't know if he's received it.
It wasn't a partisan letter.
It wasn't a negative letter.
It wasn't not a not-my-president letter, because
not my president technically goes against
my faith as well.
The Koran teaches me to be loyal, not only
loyal, but to obey people in authority above
me.
He is our president, and there's no doubt
about that.
Everybody met a Muslim and a U.S. Marine?
I feel that, at the end of the day, if we
don't fix these things, this is going to have
a -- create a larger problem for our country.
The trajectory we're headed on right now doesn'tseem like a very good one.
We're not that different.
MAN: That's right.
MANSOOR SHAMS: No need to be scared.
MAN: Right.
MANSOOR SHAMS: You know?
JUDY WOODRUFF: A news update now.
Just moments ago, a federal judge in Seattle
granted a temporary halt to President Trump's
order to restrict immigration.
The ruling applies nationwide.
Tune in tonight on "Washington Week."
A reporters roundtable examines President
Trump's world view and the world's view of
the president.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday, special correspondent
Nick Schifrin meets up with armed citizens
on patrol along the U.S. border with Mexico.
Here's a look.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Tim Foley likes to describe
himself and his men as a kind of neighborhood
watch.
For the last seven years, the 57-year-old
former Army soldier, firefighter, and construction
worker has led the Arizona border recon.
Foley describes it as a surveillance group,
but members are armed with military-style
rifles that are legal in Arizona.
TIM FOLEY, Arizona Border Recon: When the
friends come to your house, they come to the
front door and ring the bell and announce
themselves.
NICK SCHIFRIN: This desert land is a well-wornroute for Mexican cartels.
TIM FOLEY: Basically, what we're trying to
do is just hurt the cartels' pocketbook.
This area is pretty much theirs, and we're
coming back in and going, it's not yours.
It's ours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That is tomorrow night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.